Inadequacies

While I will freely admit that my program is super-cool, there are a number of aspects that can be improved.  I will discuss this in 3 parts, much like my program is split up.

First, the domain that is being explored in my expert system is both highly time-sensitive and very broad.  The system is designed for people that are looking for assistance in choosing a next-gen system for this Christmas; once Christmas has passed, its usefulness will be greatly diminished.  Of course, the underlying structure would still be valid, so it could be modified to reason more about game-preference and financial factors and not at all about time factors.  To address the issue of how broad the domain is, the program would have to have knowledge about more games, to make more informed decisions.  A facility to give the system information about more games could be instituted in Prolog by representing each game more thoroughly and providing an interface with which to add games if desired.

Second, the data collection portion of the program is very restrictive in what users can input.  Much of the user's time is taken reading what the correct syntax for input is, rather than inputting actual information.  While this is partly an issue with Prolog (requiring period terminated input), it would also be useful to create a rule that just validates input and gives useful feedback on wrong inputs.

Last, the output of results is lacking in depth.  While there is a short explanation of the results, it does not give any information about the actual rules that go into the decisions.  The textbook gives an example program called 'exshell' that represents rules and objects in a far more robust way than my program does, and if I could change my program to perform in a similar way as it does, the explanation facility would be far easier to implement.  Further, it would increase the modularity of the program, something that mine is lacking in some areas; though it is relatively easy to add some rules and object (e.g., it would not be very difficult to reason about an additional system in addition to the current 3), it would be very difficult to make the system reason about a few more factors (e.g., making multiplayer preference and past buying habits factors as important as the current three would take a lot of work to impletment).