Excerpt from Snow Crash

Neal Stephenson

Down inside the computer are three lasers - a red one, a green
one, and a blue one. They are powerful enough to make a bright 
light but not powerful enough to burn through the back of your
eyeball and broil your brain, fry your frontals, lase your lobes.
As everyone learned in elementary school, these three colors of
light can be combined, with different intensities, to produce any
color that Hiro's eye is capable of seeing.

In this way, a narrow beam of any color can be shot out of the
innards of the computer, up through that fisheye lens, in any
direction. Through the use of electronic mirrors inside the
computer, this beam is made to sweep back and forth across the
lenses of Hiro's goggles, in much the same way as the electron
beam in a television paints the inner surface of the eponymous
Tube. The resulting image hangs in space in front of Hiro's view
of Reality.

By drawing a slightly different image in front of each eye, the
image can be made three-dimensional. By changing the image
seventy-two times a second, it can be made to move. By drawing
the moving three-dimensional image at a resolution of 2K pixels
on a side, it can be as sharp as the eye can perceive, and by
pumping stereo digital sound through the little earphones, the
moving 3-D pictures can have a perfectly realistic soundtrack.

So Hiro's not actually here at all. He's in a computer-generated
universe that his computer is drawing onto his goggles and
pumping into his earphones. In the lingo, this imaginary place is
known as the Metaverse. Hiro spends a lot of time in the
Metaverse. It beats the #@#% out of the U-Stor-It.

Hiro is approaching the Street. It is Broadway, the Champs
Elysees of the Metaverse. It is the brilliantly lit boulevard
that can be seen, miniaturized and backward, reflected in the
lenses of his goggles. It does not really exist. But right now,
millions of people are walking up and down it.
The dimensions of the Street are fixed by a protocol, hammered
out by the computer-graphics ninja overlords of the Association
for Computing Machinery's Global Multimedia Protocol Group. The
Street seems to be a grand boulevard going all the way around the
equator of a black sphere with a radius of a bit more than ten
thousand kilometers. That makes it 65,536 kilometers around,
which is considerably bigger than Earth.

The number 65,536 is an awkward figure to everyone except a
hacker, who recognizes it more readily than his own mother's date
of birth: It happens to be a power of 2 - 2^16 power to be exact
and even the exponent 16 is equal to 2^4, and 4 is equal to 2^2.
Along with 256; 32,768; and 2,147,483,648; 65,536 is one of the
foundation stones of the hacker universe, in which 2 is the only
really important number because that's how many digits a computer
can recognize. One of those digits is 0, and the other is 1. Any
number that can be created by fetishistically multiplying 2s by
each other, and subtracting the occasional 1, will be instantly
recognizable to a hacker.

Like any place in Reality, the Street is subject to development.
Developers can build their own small streets feeding off of the
main one. They can build buildings, parks, signs, as well as
things that do not exist in Reality, such as vast hovering
overhead light shows, special neighborhoods where the rules of
three-dimensional spacetime are ignored, and free-combat zones
where people can go to hunt and kill each other.

The only difference is that since the Street does not really
exist - it's just a computer-graphics protocol written down on a
piece of paper somewhere - none of these things is being
physically built. They are, rather, pieces of software, made
available to the public over the worldwide fiber-optics network.
When Hiro goes into the Metaverse and looks down the Street and
sees buildings and electric signs stretching off into the
darkness, disappearing over the curve of the globe, he is
actually staring at the graphic representations - the
user interfaces - of a myriad different pieces of software that
have been engineered by major corporations. In order to place
these things on the Street, they have had to get approval from
the Global Multimedia Protocol Group, have had to buy frontage on
the Street, get zoning approval, obtain permits, bribe
inspectors, the whole bit. The money these corporations pay to
build things on the Street all goes into a trust fund owned and
operated by the GMPG, which pays for developing and expanding the
machinery that enables the Street to exist.

Hiro has a house in a neighborhood just off the busiest part of
the Street. it is a very old neighborhood by Street standards.
About ten years ago, when the Street protocol was first written,
Hiro and some of his buddies pooled their money and bought one of
the first development licenses, created a little neighborhood of
hackers. At the time, it was just a little patchwork of light
amid a vast blackness. Back then, the Street was just a necklace
of streetlights around a black ball in space.

Since then, the neighborhood hasn't changed much, but the Street
has. By getting in on it early, Hiro's buddies got a head start
on the whole business. Some of them even got very rich off of it.
That's why Hiro has a nice big house in the Metaverse but has to
share a 20-by-30 in Reality. Real estate acumen does not always
extend across universes.

The sky and the ground are black, like a computer screen that
hasn't had anything drawn into it yet; it is always nighttime in
the Metaverse, and the Street is always garish and brilliant,
like Las Vegas freed from constraints of physics and finance. But
people in Hiro's neighborhood are very good programmers, so it's
tasteful. The houses look like real houses, There are a couple of
Frank Lloyd Wright reproductions and some fancy Victoriana.


So it's always a shock to step out onto the Street, where
everything seems to be a mile high. This is Downtown, the most
heavily developed area. If you go a couple of hundred kilometers
in either direction, the development will taper down to almost
nothing, just a thin chain of streetlights casting white pools on
the black velvet ground. But Downtown is a dozen Manhattans,
embroidered with neon and stacked on top of each other.

In the real world-planet Earth, Reality, there are somewhere
between six and ten billion people. At any given time, most of 
them are making mud bricks or field-stripping their AK-47s.
Perhaps a billion of them have enough money to own a computer;
these people have more money than all of the others put together.
Of these billion potential computer owners, maybe a quarter of
them actually bother to own computers, and a quarter of these
have machines that are powerful enough to handle the Street
protocol. That makes for about sixty million people who can be on
the Street at any given time. Add in another sixty million or so
who can't really afford it but go there anyway, by using public
machines, or machines owned by their school or their employer,
and at any given time the Street is occupied by twice the
population of New York City.

That's why the place is so overdeveloped. Put in a sign or a
building on the Street and the hundred million richest, hippest,
best-connected people on earth will see it every day of their
lives.

It is a hundred meters wide, with a narrow monorail track running
down the middle. The monorail is a free piece of public utility
software that enables users to change their location on the
Street rapidly and smoothly. A lot of people just ride back and
forth on it, looking at the sights. When Hiro first saw this
place, ten years ago, the monorail hadn't been written yet; he
and his buddies had to write car and motorcycle software in order
to get around. They would take their software out and race it in
the black desert of the electronic night.
